1. Coding Proficiency
Depending on how much previous experience you have with coding in a specific language, you may have to develop new “coding muscles”. Before getting into your code, you should feel comfortable in these areas: 

Programming: An advanced level of fluency in at least one programming language, preferably Python. You will be using machine learning libraries such as TensorFlow, Keras, or PyTorch.

Deep Learning Concepts: Have an understanding of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (e.g., which layers make up a CNN, what the purpose of a filter is, and how pooling works)?

Transfer Learning: Understand how to "freeze" the base layers of a neural network and "fine-tune" the final dense layers.

Evaluation Metrics: Understanding the concepts of accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score will be critical for evaluating imbalanced data sets.

Image Processing: Understanding the different basic image processing functions available in OpenCV or PIL for manipulating images. For example (resizing, normalizing, changing from RGB to Grayscale color space).

2.Data Inspirations
An "Artificial Intelligence" for your plant is only as sound as the background from which it learns.

Dataset: The majority developers will begin with using the PlantVillage Dataset where you can find over 54,000 pictures of healthy plants and diseased plants.

Data Augmentation: Given that plant diseases can look different under various lighting and angles you must be aware of applying the following;

Rotations and Flips

Zoom and Shear

Brightness and contrast adjustments

Class Labeling: Ensuring you have structured your data correctly [Dataset/Class Name/Image.jpg]

3."Transfer Learning" Backbone
Do not develop a model from the ground up. Do some homework and select a Pre-trained Model (Backbone):
| Model | Best for |
| -- | -- |
| MobileNetV2 | Speed/lightweight (Good for use in mobile apps) |
| ResNet50 | Very accurate, deeper than original models |
| InceptionV3 | Great for complex feature extraction |
| EfficientNet | The best balance of computational cost/accuracy

4.Hardware and Software Environment
Hardware: A NVIDIA GPU (with CUDA support) is highly recommended. Use Google Colab or Kaggle Kernels if you do not have access to a powerful GPU on your local machine (Google Colab/Kaggle provide free access to GPU).

5.Software Stack:
Python version 3.10 or newer
Deep Learning Framework: Use TensorFlow/Keras or PyTorch
Development Environment: Jupyter Notebooks / VS Code
Deployment (optional): Flask/FastAPI (for web tool), TFLite (for mobile app)

Prior Knowledge: You must have prior knowledge of the following topics to complete this project.
● DL Concepts
● Neural Networks
● Deep Learning Frameworks
● Transfer Learning
● Mobilenet_v2
● Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
● Overfitting and Regularization
● Optimizers